- [Instructor] So in the previous lecture,
we installed Flutter X
code and Android studio,
and we made sure that all these tools
are set up and configured.
Now we wanna create our first Flutter app
and run it on one of these emulators.
And for this, you should, first of all,
go into a folder in your terminal here
where you wanna create and
store that Flutter project.
You can use the CD command
for Dart to navigate around.
And here in my case, I will
go into a playground folder,
which sits in a global development folder,
but you can create and use
any folder structure you want,
move into that folder
here in your terminal,
and that's really
important because the path
into which you moved here
will be used for storing
that Flutter project
that we are about to create.
And therefore once you switched
to the appropriate folder,
you can then run Flutter create
to create a new Flutter project.
You also need to give that project a name,
and I'll name at first-app,
but the name is up to you.
And then once you run this command,
a new folder with that
name, first step in my case
will be created in the path
into which you navigated before.
No here I'll hit Enter
and this one now quickly
create this project.
Now we also see two commands here,
which we could now use to
already start our Flutter app
assuming that we do have
an emulator up and running.
But I actually don't
wanna do this right away.
Instead, I now wanna
install an extra tool,
which we will use for writing our code.
We could use Android Studio for that,
but Android Studio is
quite heavy and a bit slow
and I personally don't like it too much.
So my personal preference
is a different tool,
and that tool is called
Visual Studio Code,
which is a free IDE, a free
development environment
provided by Microsoft,
which you can use for all
kinds of programming languages
and Flutter and Dart are no exceptions.
So you can visit code.visualstudio.com
to download it from there.
It's a way liable for
all operating systems
and your operating system
should be selected here by default.
So you can then download
Visual Studio Code.
And once that download is finished,
simply install it by
opening that downloaded file
and following the instructions here,
it's really straight forward.
Once you did install it, you can open it
and you should see a starting screen
that looks something like that.
The exact look might differ over time,
but it should look something like that.
Now here I have this dark look
and you can get this as well
by going to the menu, and
then there under code,
preferences, color theme, you
can choose the color theme.
And I'm using that dark plus theme,
but you can of course try
out different themes here.
But I like this a lot.
The great thing about Visual Studio Code
is also that you can install
a lot of extensions there
which make your life easier.
And there are a couple of extensions
which I'm using in this course,
which you absolutely
should install as well.
And for that you can go to
this extensions part here
in that sidebar or by using that shortcut
or by using view, extensions,
and then here, the
first extension you need
is the Flutter extension.
So search for Flutter and then make sure
you installed that extension.
That's an extension maintained
by the official Dart and Flutter team,
and it will make developing Flutter apps
with Visual studio code much, much easier.
So definitely install that.
That will then automatically
also install another extension,
the Dart extension,
which you don't need to install separately
therefore, which also helps
with writing Dart code.
And since Flutter uses
Dart, this is also helpful.
Now I'll quickly reload here
since I'm prompted for that
but that's now the first step.
And then there's one last extension,
which you can also install
and that's the material icon extension.
Now this is purely visual,
but I'm using it throughout this course.
It changes the file icons in our project.
So I will install it.
And then after installing
it, choose adhere to set it.
And this is just cosmetics.
It's not required.
But I like to look up the
file icons this gives me.
Okay, now we've got all
these extensions installed.
Now we can go here to the
explorer and open a new folder,
open a new project into Visual studio code
so that we can edit it here.
And here I'm simply picking
that first app folder,
which I created a second
ago with Flutter create
and open that here in Visual studio code.
I'm opening the entire folder.
I'm not selecting the files in there,
but the entire folder and click open.
And this will now give me
this project set up here.
Now the exact files and
folders you might be getting
could differ a little bit over time,
but you should have a lib folder,
you should have an
Android and an iOS folder
since we are on MacOS here.
You should have a test folder,
you should have a pubspec
backward yaml file,
and then you are pretty much good to go.
Now since the exact folder structure
and also the starting project you get
can differ over time, attached
you find my pubspec.yml file
and my main.dart file.
And you should use these attached files
to replace your main.dart
file into lip folder with mine
and delete any other Dart
files you might have in there
if you have more than just main.dart.
Delete anything else so that
you have just a lip folder
with my attached main.dart file in there.
And replace your
pubspec.yml file with mine
simply to make following
along with this course
and this lecture much easier.
Now I will walk you through
these folders and files
and what they do in the
next course section.
So for the moment we'll
just take them for granted
and ignore them.
I can say that the pubspec.yml file
is an important configuration
file for our project
and the lib folder holds
the main source code
for our project.
So instead lib folder
in which we will write our Flutter code.
But I don't wanna dive too
much into that right now,
we'll do that in the next section,
instead I now wanna start
this Flutter project
on an emulator
so that we can see this
Flutter app in action.
And for this, what you can
do is in Visual studio code,
go to terminal new terminal here,
to open your regular system terminal,
but integrated into this project here,
integrated into Visual studio code.
Which is good because that
means you can have your code
and this terminal on the same screen.
And then here in this
terminal, what you can do
to run this project is
you can run Flutter run.
But, before you do that,
you need to make sure
that you have an emulator
up and running.
And that could be the iOS
emulator or the Android emulator.
Now here I'll go for the Android emulator
since I will use the Android emulator
for the majority of this course,
since a windows students
can only build for Android
and hence I wanna use the emulator
all the students can use here.
You could also use iOS,
but if you're facing any problems there,
ignore them for now, later in the course
I will in detail again, show
you how to configure X code
and run your Flutter
app on a real iOS device
and on an iOS simulator.
So for the moment I'll use Android here.
And hence in Android studio,
open that ABD manager,
as we learned it in the
previous course lecture,
and then start that emulator
that I created there again,
so that I have this Android
emulator up and running,
which I use for testing my Android app,
my Flutter app on Android.
Here it is starting up.
Let me close this here.
And now that the Android
emulator is up and running
for me here,
back here in Visual studio code
in this integrated terminal,
we can run Flutter run.
And what this should do normally
is it should now convert
this Flutter project
into an Android app and start
it on the Android emulator.
It won't do that if you
don't have an emulator
up and running,
then it might try to start
this as a web application,
but we're not focusing on web
applications in this course.
So really make sure you
have your Android emulator
up and running.
Now, if "flutter run"
would still run your Flutter app as a web app.
So not on that Android emulator.
You can also control for which target
device this app is built and executed
by making sure that in Visual Studio Code
your able to view the status bar.
Because in that status bar at the bottom
you can
click on this device and that might be saying
"Chrome" or "No device" for you or anything like that.
But you can
then click on that device thing here at the bottom
and then simply choose your target device.
And here
you should choose your emulator, your simulator.
You should choose an iOS or Android device here.
And then
once you did select a device here, "flutter run"
will build this
app for this device and run the app on this device.
Now, the first time you start
this, it can take a while
because it's going through
that complete build process.
It's converting your
Flutter code to machine code
and building it as an Android app.
Under the hood it's using
Android studio for that
and therefore the first time you run this,
this can take a while.
So let's be patient here
and wait for this startup
process to finish.
And now it's installing that
built app on the emulator.
So here on the emulator you see
that something is happening.
And here we go now.
This now is running and you
can tell that it's running
by the fact that I'm not
getting any error here.
That I see a couple of
commands, which I can use.
I'll come back to them later.
And that this process didn't finish.
I'm not back into the
regular input mode again
instead we now have this
running administration mode here
where we can administer
the running application
and I'll come back to what I
mean with that in a second.
If you have a look at the emulator,
you should see this output here
with that starting project I gave to you.
And here you got this
button, which you can click.
And if you do click this button here,
you have this counter, that increments.
It might be a bit slow
initially, but no worries
that's not Flutter in general,
but this emulator can be a bit slow
also depending on your hardware.
And since I'm recording
my screen whilst using it,
it's especially not extremely fast.
But you shouldn't be
able to interact here.
And this is now our first Flutter app
built as an Android app,
running on an Android phone.
A virtual one but still an Android phone.
And the code for that
app is here in main.dart.
Now again, we'll dive into
that code and understand it
through out course, starting
in the next core section.
But in the end here we have code
for rendering this user interface,
for rendering a couple of
those so-called widgets
on this user interface, and
for managing that counter.
Now what's nice about the
development experience you get
with Flutter, is that after
this initial start here,
you don't have to stop
this running process
and run Flutter run again,
whenever you change anything in your code.
But instead you can make
code changes and reload,
hot reload, as it's called,
that running application
to see changes immediately.
For example, let's say here in line 58,
we wanna change counter
to set it equal to counter plus two.
You don't need to fully
understand the code yet,
but what this will do is it will make sure
that whenever we click the button,
the counter is not incremented by one,
but instead increased by two.
If you do that and you save the file
by pressing command
safe or using file safe,
then right now, it still increments by one
if I clicked the button.
But here in this terminal,
you see that we got a couple
of commands we can issue.
And one of them is the hot reload command,
which simply means that our updated code
will be injected into this running app,
which is nice during development.
So by pressing R once it
will perform that hot reload
and now you see I still
have my old counter here,
but if I now click plus
it's increased by two.
So that code change was
injected into the running app
and that makes development super efficient
because we don't have to stop everything
and restart the entire app
just because we made one tiny code change.
Now if this breaks for some
reason or doesn't work,
you can always also do a full restart
by pressing shift + R and
then it will restart the app.
The counter will there
for reset to zero here,
but you still don't need
to quit the entire process
and run Flutter run again,
instead of just to restart at the app
based on the latest code now.
And that's how our development
flow could look like
when using flutter run in the terminal.
But I'm saying could look like
because of with Visual studio code
and the flatter extension installed there,
we don't even have to use this approach.
Instead I'll quit this
running process here
by pressing Ctrl + C
here in that terminal.
And I'll close that terminal.
Instead of using Flutter
run there, which you could,
I'm going to go to my
menu here and then run.
And then here we can
start debugging this app
or run it without debugging.
And that's what all do here.
I'll choose run without debugging.
And what this will do for me now here,
is it will again start this
Flutter app on this emulator,
but it will execute Flutter
run behind the scenes.
Now for you it might
first of all prompt you
how you wanna run this application.
It might show a little dropdown
where you can then
choose Dart as an option
or Flutter and Dart.
So choose that option if
you are prompted to choose
how to execute this app,
choose Dart and Flutter,
or just Dart in the dropdown
you might be getting there.
Once this is running you
also might get this popup
regarding the Dart dev tools
and here we'll dive into them later.
I'll choose not now for now.
Now we also got this terminal down there,
but it's actually not the
same terminal as before.
It's just a debug console
that locks some warnings
or some information messages
to us that we might be getting.
But we now got this part
here with some controls
that we can use to
control the running app.
For example here, we got this flash,
which is now our hot reload button.
So instead of pressing R,
we can click this button to hot reload.
But we don't even have to do that
if I change my code and save this,
this will actually be
issued automatically.
So now Flutter will watch
my code changes here
and whenever I save my
code after changing it,
it will automatically
trigger a hot reload.
So then I automatically get
this new code in effect here.
So we could manually trigger
it by clicking the flash,
but we don't have to.
If we wanna do a full hot restart,
we can click this green arrow
here and then do that restart,
which we previously did
by pressing shift + R.
And if we're done for the moment,
we can press this stop
icon to stop running this,
and then it will terminate this.
We can close this console and
we can always rerun by again,
choosing run, run without debugging.
So that's how we will now
manage and run this Flutter app
for the rest of this course,
since this simply is a bit more convenient
than having to use Flutter run
and having to hot reload manually.
That's why I'm using
this FlUtter extension
driven approach instead.
Now with that we have the
development set up we need
for MacOS for building Flutter projects
as apps for iOS and Android.
And then for now and the next lectures
I'll show the same approach for windows.
Of course, you can skip that
if you are only using MacOS
and then in the next core section,
I will then dive into
that code a bit more,
and we're going to learn
how Flutter and Dart
works from the ground up.
Before we do that though,
in the next lectures,
after the windows set up,
I'll walk you through what you
can expect from the course,
and through other aspects of
working with Flutter as well.